Chapter-1 Stored energy in fuels.

Content:
There are a few diﬀerent deﬁnitions for fuel. There are three main categories that you can use to investigate fuels. Some fuels can be burnt to create heat and light.
Wood is often collected and burnt to give us heat and light. On a cold evening it is wonderful to sit around a ﬁre to tell stories and warm yourself with friends.
Wood comes from plants speciﬁcally trees. Plants use light energy from the Sun as well as carbon dioxide and water to grow. Plants take the energy and store it in their leaves roots and all parts of the plant. Wood also contains this energy stored by plants. burning wood allows us to change this stored energy into light and heat which is useful to us.
Coal is a type of fossil fuel that is also burnt to provide us with heat that we can use. The heat from coal can be used to cook our food and warm our houses.
Fossil fuels like coal were made from prehistoric plants. The plants took up energy from the Sun and stored it in their bodies. Millions of years ago the earth was mostly covered by water. The plants that died sank to the bottom of the water. Over millions of years the layers of plants were covered by layers of sand and compressed by the weight of the sand. The plant material was buried deeper and deeper under the ground where it is much hotter than on the surface of the earth. Over millions of years the plant remains changed into fossil fuels.
These fuels get their name fossil fuels because they are made from plants and animals that lived a very long time ago.
Natural gas and oil are also examples of fossil fuels. Scientists have realised that tiny sea organisms also died sank to the the bottom of the ocean and were buried under the sand. Over millions of years many layers of dead sea animals got buried like this. Over millions of years the dead sea animals changed into oil and natural gas.
Wax in a candle is burnt to provide light. by burning the candle the stored energy in the wax is released as light and heat energy.
Paraﬃn is also a fuel that contains stored energy. Paraﬃn is burnt in paraﬃn lamps and paraﬃn stoves to provide us with useful energy in the form of light and heat.
Gas is another fuel that can be burnt to release stored energy in the form of heat and light. We can use gas heaters to keep warm and gas stoves to cook food and boil water. Natural gas is odourless and colourless and it is also known as clean gas because unlike other fossil fuels it doesnt produce harmful byproducts when it burns.
Humans and animals need energy to live. We get our energy from the food that we eat.
Food contains stored energy that our bodies can change into useful energy that we need when we run jump breathe learn and do everything else that we do.
The energy value of food is often shown on the packaging of foods that we buy. The energy of food is measured either in calories cal or in joules j. a snack such as a packet of chips gives you thousands of joules of energy. Therefore we rather talk about kilojoules kj of energy when talking about the energy in food.
The energy value of a food tells us how much energy that food is worth to our bodies as fuel. An average adult man needs about kcal or   kj per day. children and adults that are not very active need less energy. People that are very active need more energy. These numbers are just to give us an idea of the amount of energy your body needs as fuel everyday.  it is important to eat a balanced diet.
Some fuels are energy sources for engines and power station
fuels can also be used to give us other forms of useful energy. Petrol or diesel is used in cars and trucks to make them go. The stored energy in the fuel is changed into movement energy of the car or truck. Petrol and diesel are made from fossil fuels.
Energy from the Sun is stored in the plants and animals which eat the plants. Their remains turned into fossil fuels over millions of years which are then mined and used to make petrol and diesel to fuel cars.
coal is not only burnt in our homes for cooking and keeping us warm. it can also be used to make electricity. a power station is a large factory where the coal is burnt in large amounts to produce electricity.
Burning fuels, We have learnt that burning fuels provides us with energy that we can use. What does a fuel need to be able to burn? it requires some energy to start burning fuel. fuel needs oxygen to burn. fuel usually gets oxygen from the air around it. There are other gases present in air as well but they do not burn.
Fire safety - We have spoken a lot about ﬁre and burning in this chapter so far. fire is a major source of heat energy for many people whether it for keeping warm cooking food or for some other purpose. although ﬁre is very useful it is also very dangerous great care is needed when using ﬁre. fire is a threat in our communities.
DID YOU KNOW? Some plants even need ﬁre to survive an example is Fynbos. This is a group of plant species found only in South africa. The seeds of Fynbos plants need smoke and heat to germinate.
There are a few safety rules that everybody should know.
Never play with matches and lighters. Make sure that matches and lighters are kept out of reach of young children who do not know how to use them properly.
in case of ﬁre  stay away. if there is a ﬁre in your home do not hide rather go outside as soon as possible.
Know the number of the local ﬁre department and phone in case of emergency.
have an escape plan for your home and practice it with your family. have a meeting place outside so that you will know everyone is safe in the event of a ﬁre.



Chapter-2 Energy and Electricity.

Coal is not the only source of energy for power stations there are also other types of power stations. find out what these are and write down what source of energy they each use.

Content:
Cells and batteries: batteries come in all shapes and sizes. batteries are needed for many diﬀerent purposes. Most torches radios calculators cell phones some toys and even cars pacemakers and hearing aids need batteries to work. Batteries are useful because they store chemical energy. When the battery is connected in an electrical appliance and the appliance is switched on the stored energy in the battery is transferred to the appliance in the form of electrical energy to make it work. An electric circuit is a system that consists of diﬀerent parts. We call these parts the components of the circuit. for example batteries light bulbs and connecting wires are components that can make up a circuit. When these components are connected the right way electricity will be transferred from one component to another. in this example the electricity would be transferred from the batteries through the connecting wire to the bulb and back through the wire to the batteries to complete the circuit. The chemical energy from the battery is transferred to electrical energy in the wires then electrical energy is transferred into heat and light energy in the bulb. Batteries are actually made up of smaller parts known as cells that store chemical energy. Two or more cells connected end to end are called a battery. We will mostly refer to them as batteries but keep in mind that cell is the scientiﬁc term for what most people call a battery in everyday life. One cell stores a small amount of energy. if we need to store a lot of energy we use a battery. a car needs a lot of energy to start its engine. One cell does not have enough stored energy. Therefore a car battery has six cells that are connected end to end inside the battery case. in this case there is six times more energy stored in the battery than in a single cell. This gives the car enough energy to start the engine.

Mains electricity: a battery has stored energy which can provide electrical energy. however our homes schools shops and factories cannot run on batteries. We use electricity for many diﬀerent things every day. The main source of electrical energy is from power stations. We call this mains electricity. Power stations need a source of energy Power stations use diﬀerent ways to generate electricity. a power station needs a source of energy. in South africa most of our power stations burn coal to use the energy stored in coal to generate electricity.
Electricity is transferred in a huge circuit to our homes from a power station electricity is transferred through transmission lines held up by pylons. The transmission lines are part of the circuit that connects the power stations to where we need to use the electricity. The transmission lines carry large amounts of electricity to substations in cities and towns. from a substation electricity is carried in smaller amounts to an electricity box for our home. from the electricity box electricity travels through wires to the plug points and light ﬁttings in our homes.

Safety and electricity: We use electricity every day. electricity can be dangerous so it is important that we use it safely. electricity can give you an electric shock. an electric shock can hurt you badly or even kill you. high voltage is very dangerous. Look out for warning signs.  Electricity can cause ﬁres and injuries even death. here are some rules for using electricity safely.
Do not put anything into an outlet except a plug.
Do not pull on the cord to unplug an appliance hold the plug and pull.
Dry your hands before you plug in or unplug a cord.
if a plug is broken or a cord is cut or worn do not use it.
Do not plug too many cords into one outlet.
Keep appliances away from water. Do not use a hair dryer if there is water nearby.
if there is an electrical storm with lightning turn oﬀ and disconnect electrical appliances like the TV and computer.
Never touch any power lines.
Some power lines are buried underground. if you are digging and ﬁnd a wire do not touch it.
Do not ﬂy a kite or climb a tree near a power line.
Chapter-1 Plants and animals on earth

CONTENT
You might have heard that people say our planet darth is the blue
Planet. When astronauts in space look down on darth, the water
that covers more than two thirds of the planet makes it look as if
the planet is blue. Thousands of plants and animals can live on
darth because there is water.
The many plants and animals that live on earth choose special
places to live. The place where a plant or animal lives is called its
habitat.
There is a special word we use when talkinh about all the animals
and plants and their diﬀerent habitat. We call it 'biodiversity' When
you look at the biodiversity of a certain area you look at all the
diﬀerent kinds of habitats in that area including all the animals and
plants in that area.

Many diﬀerent plants and animals
The earth is home to the most amazing diversity of animals and
plants. dach animal and plant naturally chooses where it wants to
live: its habitat.

aquatic habitats
Thousands of diﬀerent animals and plants live in or near water in
aquatic habitats. There are two main kinds of aquatic habitats -
marine (saltwater) habitats and freshwater habitats. The plants
and animals that live in these habitats are adapted to either live in
salt water or in fresh water.
hn South africa there are examples of both types of aquatic
habitats.
Our country has a very long coastline with many diﬀerent types of
habitats. eor example, many animals live in and around the rock
pools. They have to withstand the harsh sun and the constant
pounding of the waves.


Many animals live in or near freshwater ponds, dams and lakes,
rivers and streams. These include small insects, snails, clams, crabs,
frogs and ﬁsh. Larger animals like turtles, snakes, ducks and large
ﬁsh, as well as hippos and crocodiles also live in or near water.

Some water plants have roots, for example water lilies and reeds.
Water plants make oxygen for the animals to breathe and provide
food for many of the animals to eat.


Water lilies ﬂoating on the water.
hn South africa we also have large wetlands where rivers slow
down and the water stands still or ﬂows very slowly. Wetlands
provide food and shelter and a natural habitat for an incredible
amount of animals: frogs, reptiles, birds (like ducks and waders)
and ﬁsh, to name a few!


Deserts and semi-desert habitat
Deserts are areas that have a very low rainfall each year - in some
deserts it only rains once every    years!
The Namibian desert.
The desert may look dry, but there are many diﬀerent plants and
animals which are suited to living in these areas. Plants that can
survive without much water in the desert include grasses, acacias,
aloes, cactii and other succulents. Succulents are plants that can
store their water in their leaves and stems and survive well in dry
climates.

Many animals live in the desert (for example, the Kalahari),
including:
Predators (eg. lions, cheetahs and leopards, hyenas, jackals)
Large and small mammals (eg. meerkats, giraﬀes, warthogs,
porcupines)
antelope (eg. eland, gemsbok, springbok and hartebeest,
steenbok, kudu,duiker)
Many species of birds (eg. falcons, ravens, eagles, buzzards,
hawks, turtle doves). The social weavers are small weaver
birds that build family nests where hundreds of weaver
families can live!
Many diﬀerent reptiles (eg. puﬀadders, cobras, lizards,
geckos iguanas)
a great many insects also live in the desert, such as bees and
butterﬂies, grasshoppers and many more!

Grassland habitat
Grasslands are covered in grasses with very few trees. as soon as
the ﬁrst rains fall the grasses grow incredibly fast and new plants
sprout all over the bare earth. This is also the time when many
animal babies are born as the new grass can feed the mothers to
provide plenty of milk for the young.


Forest habitat
a forest is a large area that is mostly covered in trees. eorests are
extremely important to life on earth. The many trees clean the air
and provide oxygen for the animals on earth to breathe. They also
provide people with fuel, food and shelter, medicine and
employment (through all the industries that are built around
forestry). Many animals live in forests, from large elephants and
bears to smaller monkeys, squirrels, owls and woodpeckers.
We need to conserve (look after) our forests and stop people who
want to chop down naturally growing trees. ht is very important to
also conserve the many animals that help pollinate trees and
spread their seeds over large areas. Without these animals the
trees would not be able to reproduce and would become extinct.


Interdependence in an ecosystem
Plants and animals, humans, rivers, mountains - everything is
connected in one way or another. all living and non-living things
depend on each other.
We can group interdependence into two main groups:
The interdependence in an ecosystem between living things
(how animals and plants are interdependent).
The interdependence in an ecosystem between living and
non-living things.
hnterdependence between living things
Many plants and animals depend on each other for diﬀerent things.


Interdependence and feeding

animals depend on plants and other animals for food. animals can
be divided into the following groups, according to what they eat:
gerbivores eat plants.
carnivores eat the animals that eat the plants.
Omnivores eat plants and animals.
Scavengers feed oﬀ plants and dead animals.
Decomposers are animals that assist the natural process of
decomposition. They eat and break down the remains of dead
animals. The elements that are released during this process
(carbon, phosphorus and nitrogen) are put back in the soil
and become food for plants.


Interdependence and pollination

Plants depend on animals for pollination.
animals that pollinate ﬂowers are called pollinators. Plants use
diﬀerent methods to attract pollinators. This includes producing
nectar, special smells or having brightly coloured ﬂowers. Some
plants even make their ﬂowers look like female wasps to attract
male wasps!
bees about to collect nectar and, at the same time, pollinate the ﬂowers.
honey. Without bees, most ﬂowers cannot be fertilised. hf ﬂowers
are not fertilised, they cannot produce seeds and will not be able
to reproduce.


a world without pollinators would not be very sweet. Look at the
following things we eat and drink that all depend on pollinators.

Interdependence and seed dispersal
Plants need to have their seeds spread over a wide area. hf all the
seeds fall in one spot, the plants that grow will not have enough
water, soil or sunlight to grow properly! That is why plants make
their fruit sweet and tasty. hn this way they attract animals who will
eat the fruit, walk a long way oﬀ and excrete the seeds. Where the
seeds fall they will then have a rich, fertile soil (from the animal
excretion) to grow in! Other seeds stick to an animal's fur - they
might not even know it's there! When they brush against a tree for
example, the seed will just fall oﬀ. Plants depend on animals for
seed dispersal.


interdependence between living and non-living things
Living things are also depend on non-living things in an ecosystem.
Living things depend on their environment for:
• air (oxygen and carbon dioxide)
• Water
• Soil
• eood
• Shelter and a place to safely have their young.
• Places to hide from danger.

Water and oxygen are extremely important for all living things.


Water that we drink from a tap or from a river, is all part of a very
big system called the Water cycle. The Water cycle is a very good
example of how all living things are interdependent.



Trees and other plants depend on the water in the soil. Other
animals and plants depend on the water that runs down from the
mountains in rivers and streams and collects in lakes. Plants and
animals in the sea depend on this water as it forms the
environment that they live in.


animal types

Now we know more about the diﬀerent habitats on darth and in
South africa. We also know that animals and plants depend on
each other and on their habitat. Let's look at the diﬀerent types of
animals that live on planet darth.

Introducing this topic
This unit explores the diﬀerent kinds of animals grouped into two
main groups: vertebrates and invertebrates. caPS refer to animals
with bones and those without bones. The vertebrate groups are:
mammals, birds, reptiles, frogs (amphibians) and ﬁsh. The
invertebrate group are those without bones such as worms,
millipedes, insects, spiders, scorpions and crabs.

Grouping animals
When we group similar things together, it is called classifying.
When classifying animals, there are generally two main groups of
animals - those who have bones inside their bodies with a
backbone, and those who do not have bones inside their bodies.
• animals with a backbone are classiﬁed as vertebrates.
• animals without a backbone are classiﬁed as invertebrate.

When people realised that they could group the animals into two
main groups, they went even further and started grouping them
into smaller groups within the two main groups. Look at this next
illustration which shows some of these groups.
classiﬁcation of animals

Invertebrates
Invertebrates are animals that do not develop a backbone (spinal
column). They also do not have an endoskeleton (a bony skeleton
inside their bodies). They do develop a diﬀerent types of
skeletons, like hydroskeletons and exoskeletons.

These soft-bodied animals mostly have what we call a
hydroskeleton. dxamples of animals with a hydroskeleton are:
• sea anemones
• earthworms
• jellyﬁsh
• some starﬁsh and sea urchins
animals with such a body often need to live in or near water or
damp soil. Their skins are often thin and moist because they
breathe through their skin.

Many invertebrates have a shell or hard covering protecting their
bodies. This external skeleton is called an exoskeleton.

Vertebrates
Vertebrates are animals that have a skeleton inside their bodies (an
endoskeleton). Part of their skeleton is a backbone. The word
'vertebrate' is closely related to the word 'vertebrae' which is what
we call the individual bones that form the backbone (so
vertebrates have a backbone made up of vertebrae). Vertebrates
are broken down into   smaller groups:
• eish
• amphibians (including frogs)
• Reptiles
• birds
• Mammals


Key Concept
• There are many diﬀerent plants and animals.
• They live in diﬀerent habitats on darth.
• all the plants and animals and their habitats make up the
total biodiversity of the darth.
• South africa has a rich variety of indigenous plants and
animals and their habitats.




Chapter-2 ANIMAL SKELETONS

Question

• What does my skeleton look like?

• Why do h have bones in my body?

• Do all skeletons look like mine?

• can you tell if a skeleton belongs to an animal or a human?

* compare the bones in the backbone of the giraﬀe below with
that of the human above. What do you notice about the shape
of the vertebrae in the neck and in the back of the giraﬀe and
those of the human's neck and bones?

* Do you remember what a skeleton's function is? List as many
of the functions of the skeleton as you can think of below.

* List four other joints in your skeleton.

* How do the bones and the joints move?

. What type of skeleton do you have?
dndoskeleton

. What do all vertebrate animals have that makes them
vertebrates?

. What is a major diﬀerence between the skeletons of a mouse,
a crab and an earthworm?



CONTENT
Skeletons of vertebrates

Every time a vertebrate animal moves, it uses its bones, joints and
muscles. hn this section we are going to study the bones, joints and
muscles that help vertebrates to move.

Bones
Bones are hard and form a very strong frame structure to support
and protect a vertebrate animal's body.
Vertebrates all have similar kinds of bones - some are much bigger
than others, but the basic structure of the bones are very similar.
Diﬀerent kinds of bones.
. Now see if you can identify these bones in some other
vertebrate skeletons! Use this key to show on the picture of
the skeleton where the diﬀerent bones are :
• L = Long bone
• S = Short bone
• e = elat bone
• h = hrregular bone

Functions of the bones in a vertebrate skeleton:
. The skull
The vertebrate skull is made up of diﬀerent bones that grow
together to form a protective "box" or "shell" structure.
• The skull protects the eyes and ears, nose and mouth.
• ht protects the brain.
• The teeth and the lower jaw is also attached to the skull.
. The backbone
• The backbone is made up of vertebrae.
• a hole runs through the middle of each vertebrae. When the
vertebrae are connected, the holes all line up to form a tube.
This is where you ﬁnd the spinal cord. The spinal cord is a
bundle of nerves that is connected to the brain. ht is
surrounded by blood vessels.
• The backbone has two functions (jobs):
– it protects the spinal cord that runs inside it.
– it supports the upper body.



3. The ribs
Vertebrates have long curved bones around their chest. We call
these bones ribs. These ribs are joined to the backbone and often
to the front to form the rib cage.
• in most vertebrates, the ribcage is around the chest area of
the animal to protect the lungs, heart and other important
organs.
• in animals like snakes, the ribcage can protect and support
the the whole body.
• The breast bone in birds is much longer. The ﬂight muscles
attach to this.

Many mammals have a similar shape rib cage. compare the rib
cages of these animals to your own.

4. Shoulder blades, arms, legs and hip bones
Vertebrates use their fore and hind limbs for movement.

Many animals' limbs are attached to
their bodies at the shoulder or hip
joints. gowever not all animals have hip
or shoulder girdles - like ﬁsh and
snakes.
• Muscles attach to the shoulder
blades and they control the
movement of the forelimb or arm.
• The lower or back limbs (legs)
attach to the body at the hips.


2.2 Movement in Vertebrates
Now that you know a little more about a bones, let's see how
animals use their bones, joints and muscles to help them move.


Joints
Joints are the places where bones come together. They come
together in a special way to allow the animal or human to move -
like at your elbow or wrist. There are diﬀerent kinds of joints.


Key Concept
• a vertebrate skeleton (inside the body) has bones and
joints.
• bones are strong and form a strong frame structure.
• a skeleton protects part of the body.
• a skeleton supports the body.
• Vertebrate animals can move because they have muscles
attached to the skeleton.


• a mouse has a skeleton and backbone inside their bodies.
This is called an endoskeleton.
• a crab has no bones inside its body but a hard shell
outside its body to protect it. This is called an
endoskeleton.
• an earthworm has no bones inside its body nor does it
have a casing on the outside like the crab. ht has a
hydroskeleton which is ﬂuid support.
. below is a diagram of the human skeleton. Label the following
on the diagram of the skeleton:
• skull
• backbone
• ribs
• rib cage
• shoulder blade
• hip bone
• upper limb
• lower limb
• Think of at least two other bones in the skeleton that we
did not include in this list. Label them on the skeleton.

. jioints help us to move. Look at the diagram of the human
body. add in labels to show where you can ﬁnd an example of
the following:
• elbow joint
• knee joint
• shoulder joint
. Name the three things that all vertebrates need to be able to
move.
bones, joints and muscles; if they say tendons and ligaments
that is technically correct too so give them a point for each
one (this should earn them   bonus points)
. What is the diﬀerence between the way a human moves, the
way a dolphin moves and the way a dog moves? Describe the
movement of each animal, the limbs that are used and the
position of the body.
a human walks upright on the hind limbs whereas a dog walks
on all four limbs. a dolphin uses its front limbs and its tail to
move through the water. a human and a dog move on the
ground whereas a dolphin moves in the water. gumans and
dogs have four limbs, but a dolphin only has two limbs and a
tail for movement.



Chapter-3 Skeletons as structures


Structures
a structure is something that is arranged or put together in a
speciﬁc way and is made up of diﬀerent parts. a jungle gym is an
example of a structure. ht has many diﬀerent parts like beams,
ropes, and bars, that are put together in a special way.

a jungle gym is a type of structure. ,
Most structures are designed to remain stable and rigid which means they should not break and crumble or topple and fall over if
something heavy is placed on top of or against them.

Structures have diﬀerent jobs or functions. They:
• support
• protect
• enclose - that means they keep something in or they keep
things from getting in (like a tin of juice or a fence around a
building).
• help with movement
We get three kinds of structures:
• frame structures
• shell structures
• solid structures
all structures, the shape of the structure is very important. a
structure will be able to resist or hold a certain weight depending
on its shape.
in Matter and Materials, we looked at strong frame
structures and also how to make structures stronger using struts
and braces. hn this chapter in Life and Living, we are going to focus
on two kinds of structures: frame structures and shell structures.
This is because they relate to the skeletons of animals.


Frame structures
Frame structures are easy to identify because they have a frame or
a skeleton. These structures are built or put together by attaching
pieces of material together to make a frame. Look at these photos
of frame structures.

One of the most important frame structures for all vertebrate animals is their skeleton. The material used to make this frame is bone that is attached to the muscles that move the skeleton. The skeleton supports the muscles and protects the organs.


In general, we can say that all vertebrates have a frame structure as a skeleton. This is because vertebrates have an endoskeleton which supports makes a frame to support the body.

Shell structures
Shell structures generally hold or protect things inside the structure. gumans make shell structures to protect and hold things, like a dish, a tin, a car or house.

In nature, eggshells and the exoskeletons of invertebrates, like crab and crayﬁsh shells, are examples of shell structures. Shell structures are made to resist a very heavy load.

Strengthening Structures
Structures that protect something or hold a weight without breaking or falling, need to be really strong. Let's investigate the
diﬀerent ways we can use to strengthen a structure.

