a 
 
GM bjah 
 
Natural Science and Technology 
Grade 5 
Life and Living and Structures 
Term 1 
 
 
Contents 
Topic a: Plants and animals ................................................................................................. b 
Unit a: Different plants and animals.................................................................................. b 
Unit b: Interdependence ................................................................................................... d 
Unit c: Animal types ......................................................................................................... f 
Topic b: Animal skeletons .................................................................................................... i 
Unit a: Skeletons of Vertebrates ....................................................................................... i 
Unit b: Movement in vertebrates .................................................................................... aa 
Topic c: Skeletons as structures ........................................................................................ ab 
Unit a: Frame and shell structures ................................................................................. ab 
Topic d: Food chains.......................................................................................................... ad 
Unit a: Food and feeding ................................................................................................ ad 
Unit b: Food chains ........................................................................................................ ag 
Topic e: Life cycles ............................................................................................................ ah 
Unit a: Growth and development .................................................................................... ah 
Unit b: Life cycle of a plant ............................................................................................. ai 
Unit c: Life cycle of an animal ........................................................................................ bj 
 
b 
 
GM bjah 
 
Topic a: Plants and animals 
 
Unit a: Different plants and animals 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
Habitat: the natural home of a plant or an animal 
Biodiversity: the variety of all the plants and animals on Earth 
Indigenous: plants and animals that have always lived in a certain area 
Shelter: a place that gives protection from bad weather and danger 
 
The biodiversity of the Earth is made up of all the plants and animals, and their habitats. 
Habitats are natural homes for plants and animals. Animals and plants have special 
features to survive in their habitat.  
 
South Africa has a wide variety of indigenous plants and animal. The plants and animals 
have always lived and survived in a particular area. 
 
A. Plants grow in different habitats 
• Water lilies grow in water.  The leaves are large and flat and float on water 
• Aloes live in dry areas.  Their leaves are thick and fleshy and store water. 
 
 
 
 
 
c 
 
GM bjah 
 
Activity a 
Redraw the following table in your workbook. List c other indigenous plants, their habitats 
and how they have adapted to that living environment. An example has been included to 
assist you. 
 
Plant 
Habitat 
Adaptation 
 
Example: 
Rooibos plants 
 
 
Dry, sandy soil 
 
The leaves are thin and small. Less water is lost 
from the leaves. 
 
 
A. Animals live in different habitats 
Habitats are places where animals and different organisms get there food, water, air and 
shelter. Shelter protects animals against their enemies as well as the weather elements. 
                                                          
• Toucans live in forests.  They have small wings to easily fly through the branches and 
leaves of the rainforest trees. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• Zebras live in grasslands.  The white stripes on their bodies, temporarily confuse their 
predators vision when they run away from them.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d 
 
GM bjah 
 
Activity b 
Redraw the following table in your workbook. List c other animals, their habitat and how 
they have adapted to that living environment. An example has been included to assist you. 
 
Plant 
Habitat 
Adaptation 
Example: 
Fish 
 
Water 
Gills are used for breathing. 
Fins are used for movement. 
                           
 Unit b: Interdependence 
 
Vocabulary 
 
Interdependence: when living and non- living things depend on each other for survival 
Ecosystem: areas where certain types of plants and animals live. In these areas they 
depend on each other as well as non- living things to survive 
 
A. Interdependence between living things 
a. Interdependence and feeding 
 Animals depend on each other for food.  Included, are the following groups: 
a. Herbivores eat plants. 
b. Carnivores eat other animals. 
c. Omnivores eat both plants and animals. 
d. Scavengers feed off dead animals and plants. 
e. Decomposers eat and break up dead animals and put the chemicals from their 
bodies (carbon, phosphorus and nitrogen) back into the soil to feed the plants. 
 
b. Interdependence and pollination 
We call animals that pollinate flowers pollinators. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Plants produce nectar that attracts pollinators. However, it could also be a special smell 
or a bright coloured flower that attracts them. Animals use pollination for reproduction. 
 Bees are an example of pollinators 
e 
 
GM bjah 
 
c. Interdependence and seed dispersal 
 
 
 
 
     
 
Plants make the fruit sweet and tasty, so that animals eat and excrete the seeds. Seeds 
could stick to the animal’s fur as well. In these ways the animal assists the plant in 
dispersing the seed. 
 
B. Interdependence between living and non- living things 
Living and non- living things depend on each other in an ecosystem. 
The following table shows the relationship between living and non-living things. 
 
NON-LIVING THING 
                             FUNCTION 
Shelter 
Protection from predators or weather. 
Air 
Oxygen, either from the air or dissolved in water, is required for 
respiration. 
Water 
All living things require liquid water. 
Food 
Al living things need food for energy.  
Space 
Space is needed for food, water, shelter and reproduction 
 
Water and oxygen are extremely important for all living things. 
Water that we drink is part of a gigantic system called the Water Cycle. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Birds are an example of animals 
that disperse seed 
f 
 
GM bjah 
 
Activity c 
Carefully draw and label the Water Cycle. Ensure that the following labels are included: 
• Evaporation 
• Condensation 
• Precipitation 
• Freezing 
• Melting  
• Run off 
 
Unit c: Animal types 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
Exoskeleton: the shell or hard covering on the outside of animals 
Endoskeleton: a skeleton found inside of an animal’s body 
Invertebrate: an animal that does not have a backbone made of bones 
Vertebrate: an animal with a bony backbone 
Moult: to shed the outer covering of the body and to grow a new, bigger one 
Cartilage: flexible, tough substance that cushions bones at the joints 
Features: important or noticeable parts of something 
 
Animals without bones- Exoskeletons 
• Some animals have no bones at all. These animal’s bodies are covered and protected 
with a hard exterior layer called an exoskeleton. 
• Animals with exoskeletons are called invertebrates.  
• Exoskeletons are plates joined together to make hard shells. 
• The only soft parts are at the parts where the body bends, e g. the leg. 
• These animals have to moult to grow. 
g 
 
GM bjah 
 
The six groups of invertebrates 
Group Name 
Examples 
Sponges 
Sponge 
Jellyfish 
Jellyfish, anemone 
Worms 
Earthworm, flatworm 
Molluscs 
Snail, octopus 
Starfish 
Starfish, sea urchin 
Arthropods 
Spider, crab 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Starfish 
Sea sponge 
Anemone 
(Say: an air moan ee) 
Snail 
Jellyfish 
Flatworm 
Sea urchin 
Crab 
Octopus 
h 
 
GM bjah 
 
A. Animals with bones – Endoskeletons 
 
• Some animals have backbones made of small bones called vertebrae. 
• These animals are called vertebrates. 
• A frame structure made of bone and cartilage is called an endoskeleton. 
• The skeleton is covered by muscles and soft body tissue. 
• The animal is able to grow without having to moult. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The five groups of vertebrates 
Group Name 
Examples 
Mammal 
Elephant, human, rat 
Birds 
Blue crane, ostrich 
Fish 
Shark, surgeon fish 
Amphibians 
Frog, newt 
Reptiles 
Snake, crocodile 
 
 
 
elephants 
bluecrane 
surgeon fish 
newt 
crocodile 
i 
 
GM bjah 
 
 Activity d 
Find and paste at least two pictures of each vertebrate group in your class work book. 
 
Topic b: Animal skeletons 
 
Unit a: Skeletons of Vertebrates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
vital organs: organs in the body that are absolutely necessary for life 
limb: body attachments such as legs, arms or tails 
joint: place where two or more bones meet 
backbone (spine): the backbone that stretches from the skull to just below the hipbone 
shoulder blades (scapular): upper limbs (arms) are attached at the shoulder blades 
ribs: joint to the spine to form a rib cage around the chest area 
hip bone (pelvis): the lower and back limbs (legs) are attached at the hips 
skull (cranium): head bone that protects the brain 
 
Skeletons of vertebrates 
 
Skeletons support and give shape to the body. They protect the soft organs of the body. 
The skeletons of vertebrates are made of bones and cartilage. Cartilage is found at the 
joints. Cartilage is a tough, flexible substance that allows bones to rub together smoothly 
without causing pain. Joints are places in the body where the bones meet. 
 
Bones 
Bones are hard and form a very strong frame structure to support and protect a vertebrate 
animal’s body. 
aj 
 
GM bjah 
 
 
The functions of the bones: 
a. The skull 
                                 
 - Protects the eyes, ears, nose, mouth 
 - Protects the brain 
- Teeth and the lower jaw are also attached to the skull      
 
 
b. The spine  
                                                                                   
- Made up of vertebrae 
- A hole runs through each vertebra.                                 
- The backbone has two functions: 
       a. It protects the spinal cord with all the nerves vessels in it. 
       b. It supports the upper body. 
 
 
c. The ribs 
- Where the ribs are in the chest area, it protects the lungs, heart and other important 
organs  
- In snakes, the ribcage can protect and support the whole body  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
d. Shoulder blades, hip bones, arms legs 
- The upper limbs (arms) are attached to the body at the shoulder blade 
- The lower limbs (legs) are attached at the hips. 
 
aa 
 
GM bjah 
 
Unit b: Movement in vertebrates 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
muscles: masses of tough elastic tissue that pull our bones when we move 
tendons: tough cords that attach muscles to bones  
ligaments: bones that connect bone to bone and strengthens the joint 
adaptation: changes in a body over time to suit the environment 
 
Bones are very hard and cannot bend, yet your body can move in many ways. You can 
move because your body has joints and you have muscles that pull your bones to move 
your body. Muscles are attached to bones by tendons. Bones are connected to each 
other by ligaments. 
 
Muscles 
If you move your fingers as if you are pretending to be playing piano, you can see the 
tendons on the back of your hands. These strong bands join your muscles to your bones. 
 
Muscles work in pairs. When one muscle contracts, or 
becomes shorter and fatter, it pulls the bone to which it 
is joined. The bone is able to move. The other muscle 
in the pairs   becomes larger and relaxes.  
 
There are two muscles that enable you to move your arm – your triceps and your biceps. 
 
Joints 
We find joints at places in the body where two or more bones meet. Joints make our 
skeletons flexible. There are different kinds of movable joints in the bodies of vertebrates 
that allow animals to move in different ways. 
 
ab 
 
GM bjah 
 
To bend your arm, the bicep muscle “contracts’ and pulls on the radius bone and the 
tricep muscle “relaxes”. Your arm then bends at the elbow joint.  To straighten your arm, 
the tricep muscle “contracts” and pulls on the ulna bone and the bicep muscle “relaxes”. 
 
Activity e 
a. In a paragraph of about e sentences, describe how people would move without joints. 
b. Your arms have more than one joint. See how many ways you can move: 
a. your elbow joint 
b. your wrist joint 
c. your shoulder joint 
d. your thumb joint 
c. Which joint in question b allows you the most movement?  
 
Topic c: Skeletons as structures 
 
Unit a: Frame and shell structures 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
struts: strong structures that is able to support a weight 
frame structure: framework of struts that are joined in together. Mainly in triangular 
shapes called triangulation  
shell structure: a structure that has a strong layer on the outside that holds itself up 
 
A. Frame structures 
Struts are very strong structures that can support a lot of weight. We are able to join struts 
together in triangular shapes to create strong frame structures like bridges and cranes. 
 
ac 
 
GM bjah 
 
The vertebrate skeleton as a frame structure 
One of the most important frame structures for all vertebrates is their skeleton. The 
material used to make this frame is bone that is attached to the muscles that move the 
skeleton. This skeleton supports and protects their bodies. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
B. Shell structures 
A shell structure is a structure that has a strong layer on the outside that holds itself up. It 
is not strengthened by joining struts together like a frame structure. The outer layer is 
strong enough to support the weight of the structure and to keep its shape. 
 
Some invertebrates’ exoskeletons are shell structures 
Some invertebrates have strong exoskeletons that protect their 
bodies from the outside. A crab’s body is covered by a strong 
exoskeleton. This protects the body and organs of the crab and 
gives the crab its shape. The exoskeleton is an example of a shell 
structure. 
 
The shells of some invertebrates that live in the sea, like molluscs and oyster, are shell 
structures. The hard shell protects the animals inside it. Starfish, crayfish and snails are 
other examples of invertebrates with exoskeletons that are shell structures.  
 
 
 
             Did you know...? 
The ribcage is a frame structure that 
protects the heart and lungs – but can 
be damaged by as little as a sneeze. 
ad 
 
GM bjah 
 
Activity f 
Answer the following questions: 
 
a. What type of structure is a pylon? Give a reason for your answer. 
b. What type of structure is a skeleton? Give a reason for your answer.  
c. What shapes are you likely to find in a pylon. Briefly explain why these shapes make 
the structure strong. 
d. What shapes are likely to be found in a human skeleton. 
What makes the structure strong? 
e. How are the struts of the skeleton joined together? 
f. How are the struts of the pylon joined together? 
g. Can you think of other ways in which these two structures 
are the same?  
h. How are they different? 
 
Topic d: Food chains 
 
Unit a: Food and feeding 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
substance: any part of a solid, liquid or gas 
nutrients: substances that help living things grow 
photosynthesis: the process that plants use to manufacture food 
 
 
 
ae 
 
GM bjah 
 
Green plants make their own food 
 
Green plants do not eat food like animals do. Green plants make their own food. They use 
the food that they make to grow and build their branches and stems as well as other parts, 
such as roots, flowers and fruit. 
 
Plants use energy, water and other substances from the air and soil to produce food. 
      
 
                                          
 
   
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
• They absorb water and nutrients through their roots. 
• The water travels to the leaf or stem where the plants make the food. 
• The plants use the gas carbon dioxide from the air. 
• They also use sunlight energy from the sun for this process. 
• The plants use the water and carbon dioxide gas with the sunlight energy to make food 
that we call sugars. 
• The plants give off the oxygen as a by- product of this process. 
• The plant can use the food (sugars) that it produced to carry out the life processes. 
• Plants generally make far more food than they need to live. They store the extra food 
that they make in different parts of the plant. 
• Animals then eat these parts of the plant (or the whole plant) to get food. 
 
 
 Photosynthesis 
af 
 
GM bjah 
 
Animals need food to carry out life processes 
 
Animals cannot make their own food. They must eat food to stay alive. Food gives animals 
energy. They use this energy for their life processes.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Living things that get energy by eating either a plant or animals are called consumers. 
• Many animals eat plants to get energy. We call these animals herbivores. 
• Some animals eat other animals to get energy. We call these animals carnivores. 
• Other animals can eat plants and animals, like baboons or people. We call these 
animals omnivores. 
• We get special animals called scavengers and decomposers. They eat dead animals 
and break their bodies into tiny pieces that can go into the soil as compost.  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Animals need energy to 
    Move 
Reproduce 
    Feed 
    Grow 
   Excrete 
  Breathe 
Cows are herbivores 
Lions are carnivores 
Humans are omnivores 
Ants are scavengers 
ag 
 
GM bjah 
 
Unit b: Food chains 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
producers: plants that produce or make their own food 
energy flow: energy that is passed on from one organism to the next 
consumers: animals are unable to produce their own food, so they consume plants and 
animals 
food chain: the order in which animals eat plants and other animals to get energy 
 
There is a feeding relationship between producers and consumers. 
We call this relationship a food chain. 
• Plants are the producers. 
• Animals are the consumers. 
 
A food chain describes how each living thing gets food and how energy is passed from 
one organism to the next. 
• When we draw a food chain we use an arrow (    ) between organisms to show that 
one eats the other and that energy is transferred from the one organism to the next. 
• A simple food chain is: grass      cow       human 
• Many food chains that are interdependent linked are called a food web. 
 
The organisms that make up a food chain cannot be in any random order. They have to 
be in the specific order in which the energy is transferred between them in an ecosystem. 
 
Activity g 
 
a. Write a food chain poem.  
b. The heading of your poem must describe or label the type of habitat in which the food 
chain is located. 
ah 
 
GM bjah 
 
c. The body must explain the flow of energy in the food chain. 
d. The ending must repeat the heading and your name. 
e. Use a thesaurus to get ideas for different verbs instead of only using “EAT”. 
 
Example: 
 
The Jungle 
There are the tiger cubs 
that were fed by the fierce tigress 
that caught the rabbit 
that munched on grass 
that grows in the jungle where 
Themba would love to play! 
 
Topic e: Life cycles 
 
 
Unit a: Growth and development 
 
    
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
life cycle: stages through which a living thing passes during its lifetime 
extinct: no longer exists on Earth 
offspring: the young of an animal or plant 
 
 All living things have a life cycle. 
 Plants and animals grow and develop throughout their lives. 
 All plants and animals need to reproduce or they will become extinct. 
ai 
 
GM bjah 
 
 An adult animal or plant needs to reproduce offspring that will grow over time into a 
new adult that will reproduce offspring of its own. 
 This is called a life cycle because when a new plant or animal is made the cycle 
begins again. 
 The plant or animal can die anywhere in its life cycle-at birth, as a young or old plant or 
animal. 
 
Unit b: Life cycle of a plant 
 
 
                             
 
 
                 
                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
pollination: when pollen from the male parts of a flower reaches the female parts of the 
flower 
germinate: begin to sprout or grow into seedling 
 
Nearly all the flowering plants that you see around you began their life as little as seeds. 
When the conditions are right, seeds grow into seedlings.  
 
Seedlings eventually grow into adult plants. Adult plants grow into flowers.  
 
After the flowers have been pollinated, they can turn into fruit with seeds in them. These 
seeds will germinate in soil and grow into new plants.  
 
In this way, the cycle of life continues. 
bj 
 
GM bjah 
 
Unit c: Life cycle of an animal 
 
                                           
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Vocabulary 
 
reproduce: when plants and animals produce offspring 
extinct: when all the individuals of a type of plant or animal die and no more are left 
internal fertilization: joining of male cells and female eggs inside the body 
external fertilization: joining of male cells and female eggs outside of the body 
 
All living things need to produce. That means that they need to make more living 
things like themselves. Reproduction makes sure that different kinds of living things 
do not become extinct or die out. 
Animal reproduction 
• The life cycle of an animal shoes all the stages it goes through from the time it is 
born until it dies. 
• Animals are either born alive from their mother or they hatch from eggs. 
• They then grow and mature into adults. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
ba 
 
GM bjah 
 
    Fertilization 
• Most animals need a partner to reproduce. 
• Males produce cell that are called sperm. 
• Females make eggs inside of their bodies. 
• The sperm and eggs must join together to form new 
life. This is called fertilization. 
• Internal fertilization occurs when the eggs and sperm join inside the female’s body. 
• External fertilization occurs when the female lays eggs and the male spreads his 
sperm over the eggs. 
 
Activity h 
Read the following text about the life cycle of a chicken and use the information to answer 
the questions that follow. 
 
 
 
       
  
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
The hen and the rooster mate. The rooster puts sperm inside of the hen. 
When the sperm cell joins with the egg cell inside the hen’s body, fertilization takes 
place. After about bd hrs the hen can lay eggs. The embryo grows into a chick within ba 
days. The hen keeps her eggs warm and the hard shell protects the developing chick. 
The baby bird hatches by breaking through the shell with its little beak. After about d 
weeks, the chicks will grow feathers. Chicks are fully grown within f months. The life 
cycle will then begin again. 
bb 
 
GM bjah 
 
Questions 
a. Draw a picture for each for each stage in the life cycle    of a chicken. Draw the picture in 
the correct order to make a cycle. Link the stages with arrows. Use the following words as 
clues: hen and rooster; egg; hatch; more feathers fully grown. 
b. Next to each arrow, write the approximate time it takes for one stage to lead to the next. 
c. Write a sentence underneath each picture to say what stage of the life cycle of the chicken 
is shown. 
 
Bibliography 
Platinum Natural Sciences and Technology – Maskew Miller Longman 
Day by Day Natural Sciences and Technology – Maskew Miller Longman 
Thunderbolt kids Natural Science and Technology- Dept. of Basic Ed.  
 
