Theme 1

Once Upon a Time 

Do you enjoy hearing these words? What do they mean to you?  
Do you prefer to listen to watch or read a story? 


Activity 1 
Talk about your predictions class discussion. Before you listen to the story listen to the title of the story and discuss the following 
 
1. What do ducklings look like? 
 
How would you feel if you were known as the ugly child?   
Does this give you any clues to what the story is about? Explain.


The Ugly Duckling 

Once upon a time on an old farm a Mother Duck sat on a clutch of new eggs.
One morning the eggs hatched and out popped a fleet of six yellow chirpy ducklings. One egg remained. It was bigger than the rest. When it finally cracked open a strange looking duckling with grey feathers gazed up at a worried mother. I cant understand how this ugly duckling can be one of mine she said to herself shaking her head as she looked at her last born. The grey duckling certainly wasnt pretty and since he ate far more than his brothers he soon outgrew them. As the days went by the poor ugly duckling became more and more unhappy. His brothers didnt want to play with him he was so clumsy and all the farmyard animals laughed at him. He felt sad and lonely.


After listening discuss the following questions as a class.
1. Is this story based on fact or fiction? Explain.

2.What clues does the title of the story give you about the 
main character?  

3.How would you compare the ugly duckling to the other 
ducklings? 
 
4.How did the other animals behave towards the ugly duckling? Did they have a good
reason for this?

5.Have you ever been laughed at? How did you feel?  

6.How do these expressions relate to the story so far? 
a.Do not count your chickens before they hatch.
b.Do as you would be done by.
c.It is easy to kick a man when hes down.


Happy Endings Stand Out
Predict whether the story of the Ugly Duckling will have a sad or happy ending.
Give an example of each.


Listen to the end and respond.
Fortunately the story of the Ugly Duckling does have a happy ending.
Listen to the end and find out what happens.


Glossary 
Scorn: a strong feeling that someone is inferior or not good enough.
Migrate: to move to another country or place for a season.
Grotto: a cave near water.
 
 

 

The story of the ugly duckling is great to act out but first it must be adapted into a script. When a story or a book is adapted or changed into a script to be performed as a play or a film, it is called an adaptation.

When you adapt a story into a play you must think of the following things 
 Your audience: What age are they? What will they enjoy about the story? 
 The script: Does it tell the story? Does it need a narrator as well as the characters? 
 The characters: Will you need more characters to make it more interesting? 
 
The narrator is the person who tells the story. In this play the narrator is not one of the characters.



Prepositions

A preposition is a part of speech that tells you where one thing is in relation to another thing. Prepositions come just before the noun they are referring to.
E.g. Ducklings swim in the water.


Nouns and Pronouns 

Nouns are naming words that name things feelings people creatures plants and places.
Pronouns can take the place of nouns. You will need to know all about nouns and 
pronouns before you learn about subjects and objects so refresh your memory.

Common nouns are names of ordinary things: e.g.duck, window, road, pie, field, hat.

Proper nouns are names given to people, places, things, months, events books e.g.Table Mountain, Cape Town, Jennifer, Saturday (They always begin with a capital letter.)

Abstract nouns name things that we feel but cannot touch: e.g.feelings, ideas, emotions like love, fear, gratitude, education, justice, peace.

Collective nouns are names for groups of things people or animals e.g. a pride of lions, a bunch of flowers, a crowd of people, a flock of birds a class of learners.

Pronouns take the place of nouns e.g. it, he, she, they, them, I, you, me, we.
 
 

Activity i Write down all of the nouns and pronouns from the paragraph below and next to each one state the type of noun.

Liam wrote a letter to Father Christmas. It was a wishlist. He asked for a Playstation Four a pair of shoes and a new bicycle. He was filled with excitement. His brother had faith that Liam would share his new toys with him. They woke up early to open the presents under the tree. Dad got a set of golf clubs and mom got a string of pearls. The boys were happy with their hoard of treasure. 





Subject and Predicate
 
The subject in a sentence tells you who or what is performing the action.
E.g. The fluffy duckling hugs Benny.

STEP 1 Find the verb. The verb is hugs.
STEP 2 Ask Who or what performs the verb? Who hugs? The fluffy duckling = subject 

Subject
The subject always consists of a noun or pronoun but can sometimes contain an article and/or an adjective too. 

Predicate
The rest of the sentence is called the predicate.The predicate contains a verb and other parts of speech. If there is another noun in the predicate that noun is called the object.

 

Direct and Indirect Object 

The predicate of a sentence contains the verb the direct object and the indirect object.


Direct Object
A direct object is the person or thing that is acted upon by the subject and the verb. To find the direct object ask Whom? Or What?  
 
For example: Kamogelo  answered  the question.
Subject: Kamogelo
verb: answered
Object: question


Indirect Object
An indirect object receives the direct object and answers the question to whom/what or for whom/what. The indirect object often has a preposition before it 
e.g. (to, for) which makes it easier to spot.


For example: Kaelo gave her sweet to her friend.
Subject: Kaelo
verb: gave
Direct Object: her sweet
Preposition: to
Indirect Object: her friend



Determiners 

Determiners are words placed in front of a noun to make it clear what the noun refers to.

Determiners include: 
1. Articles: a, an, the 
2. Numbers: one, seven, three-hundred
  
As well as other words like: this, that, these, those all, few, some, many, any, his, her, their, your, my, another.


Not all sentences have an object.
Toby walked along happily.

Some sentences only have a direct objects
 
 
 
Conditional Sentences and Clauses (Ifclauses)
 
Conditional sentences can be used to state something that:
a.is likely to happen 
b.is unlikely to happen 
c.can never happen because the condition is not possible.

A conditional clause usually begins with the word If. In a sentence that begins with If, the conditional clause sets up a condition and the main clause tells us what will or would happen if that condition is met. The main clause in a conditional sentence often contains will, would or would have.



 
 
Adverbs 

An adverb is a word that describes a verb e.g. she ran quickly past the volcanic lava.
They can also describe adjectives e.g. that was an extremely dangerous earthquake.


There are 5 types of adverbs   
Manner  
Time  
Place 
Degree 
Frequency  
 
 
 
 
FRIENDLY LETTER FORMATMAT OF A FRIENDLY LETTER 
                                                                                     10 Master Street
Airfield 		(ADDRESS AND DATE)
Benoni  		(NO FULL STOPS)
1501
1 August 2017
 
Dear Dad/Mum/Grandma/Uncle (GREETING TO THE PERSON) 
 
1. Introduction (START IMMEDIATELY WITH THE TOPIC) 
 
2. Body (ADD MORE INTERESTING/APPROPRIATE INFORMATION)
 
3. Conclusion (END THE LETTER)
 
4. Your sondaughter (END WITH WHO YOU ARE TO THE PERSON)
5. Sam (ADD YOUR NAME)  NO FULLS STOPS IN THE ENDING 
 
 
 
 
 
Theme 2


Events that Shake the World 

Some events will always stand out because they are so important like the first democratic elections in South Africa on the 27 April 1994. Others stand out for more tragic reasons. Earthquakes tsunamis and volcanos are all natural disasters that have the power to affect lives forever. 

These events are normally written as an article or a report.

Reports:
Reports are factual accounts or summaries written in a formal concise manner. 

1. Reports may be either investigative or eyewitnessed.
2. The aim is to convey and record information.
3. Avoid using the first person I or me.
4. Include the time date and facts of the incident.


Report Example

11 March 2018 
15:00pm Thursday
 
At quarter to three in the afternoon Japans most powerful earthquake since records began struck 400km NorthEast of the capital city Tokyo triggering a massive tsunami.
Most earthquakes measure less than 3 on the Richter scale and are barely felt.
Only a tiny number of quakes measure over 7 on the scale. 

Today in Japan cars ships and buildings were swept away by a wall of water following the earthquake that measured 8.9. A ten metre wave struck the port city of Sendai deluging farmland and sweeping cars across the airports runway. The tsunami rolled across the Pacific Ocean as fast as 800kmh the same speed as a jetliner and hit Hawaii and the US West Coast. There were no reports of major damage there though. Train services were stopped stranding millions of commuters in the Japanese capital and about four million homes around Tokyo suffered power cuts.This is the kind of earthquake that hits once every 100 years said a restaurant worker.
 
 
 

Noun Phrases 
A noun phrase can be either one word or a group of words  

1. A noun or a pronoun alone e.g. People can be greedy. I am doing some research. It was destroyed by a tsunami.


2. A determiner and a noun e.g. Our friends lived in Japan. Those buildings were elaborate. That book is mine.

3.Sometimes including an adjective e.g. Our closest friends lived in Japan.

4.Sometimes beginning with a qualifier e.g. All those buildings were destroyed. Both of the disasters led to Sendai being destroyed. Scientist are intrigued by some remaining traces of aftershocks.
 
 
Noun phrases can be the subject or the object of a sentence just like nouns and 
pronouns.


Descriptive Phrases 

Writing a report is not the same as writing an imaginative story. A report is based on facts but that does not mean there are no descriptions. Tilly needed to describe what she saw in the sea that made the conditions stand out from the norm.


Adjectival phrases
Adjectival phrases do the work of the adjectives. They are groups of words without a verb that describe a noun 
e.g.The sea with its frothing bubbling appearance meant danger was coming. The underlined phrase is acting as an adjective because it describes the sea.

Phrases like this add interest or specific detail to descriptions.


Adverbial phrases 
Adverbial phrases do the work of adverbs. They are groups of words that modify or 
describe a verb. Like adverbs they answer the questions how where when or how 
much?  

E.g.
A devastating wave was coming towards the holiday beach.
From where was it coming? 

 
Prepositional phrases

Prepositional phrases begin with a preposition under the sea in the sand. Many adverbial and adjectival phrases begin with a preposition and therefore can also be called prepositional phrases.




Mood 
A good writer should be able to capture a certain mood in a text or piece of writing. The mood of a text refers to the feeling that comes across when you read it. A report on a natural disaster will have a sad serious sombre mood. The mood created in a horror story will be frightening ominous and tense.The mood in a love story will be blissful.Sometimes we need to read between the lines to figure out the mood of a text just like when somebody tells you that he or she is fine but you can see that he or she is upset.Perhaps someone is feeling nervous but is trying to hide it. The words may seem happy but we must look for clues in the description that reveal the tension.

 
 
Synonyms and Antonyms 

Synonyms are words with similar meanings.There is more than just one word that can 
be used to represent a concept.Make your writing more exciting by looking in a 
Thesaurus for synonyms which may be more exciting to use in your sentences.
Antonyms are words with opposite meanings.
Dangerous  safe lost  found internal  external colourful  dull Sometimes antonyms can be created by adding a prefix like un dis or in to the root word.Pleased  displeased friendly  unfriendly sincere  insincere honest  dishonest 
 
 
Homonyms and Homophones 
Homophones are words that sound alike but have different spellings and different 
meanings.
E.g. sea and see.


 
Homonyms are polysemic.This means that they are words that have the same spelling and same pronunciation but have different meanings.You will always have to consider 
the context of the word to figure out which meaning is intended.
E.g.
leaves noun grow on trees and leaves verb evacuating  going away.


Theme 3
 
 
A Not So Simple Story 
Sometimes we make judgements about people based on preconceived ideas we have about them because of their appearance where they are from what group of people they belong to or because they are seen to be different in some way.Sometimes we dont even realise that we are doing it.This is called prejudice.

 


Clauses 

A clause is a group of related words containing a subject and a verb. You have already learned about main or independent clauses which make sense as sentences on their own and subordinate or dependent clauses which depend on the main clause in order to make sense.

Main and subordinate clauses come in many varieties.

A verb clause makes sense on its own and is called an independent clause.
Verb clauses can be statements questions or commands.
For example 
The water is sparkling. statement  
Did you wash your hands? question  
Turn off the tap command 
 

Noun Clause
A noun clause is a group of related words that act together as a noun.
A noun clause does not make sense on its own so it is known as a dependent clause.
A noun clause can be the subject or the object of a sentence.


 
Revise Figurative Language 
When we speak figuratively we use expressions that may seem to say one thing but actually mean something else.We do this because it is a great way to paint pictures in our imaginations.For example to say he is a fish out of water means that he is in 
an uncomfortable situation that he is not used to but we can just imagine the desperation and panic that person is experiencing when we compare him to a fish 
desperately flapping about on land struggling to breathe 
 


Simile and Metaphor
Similes and metaphors are both figures of speech that make comparisons in order to create images in our imaginations.

Simile and Metaphor 
A simile is a figurative comparison that compares two things using like or as.
A metaphor is a figure of speech that makes a direct comparison between two things by 
saying that something is something else
 
Some similes and metaphors have become so commonly used in English that almost 
every English speaker recognises them and knows what they mean.
These are called idioms.
E.g. In deep water 

Some of the commonly used figurative sayings teach us a wise message.
These are called proverbs.
E.g.Youll never miss the water till the well runs dry.



Definite and Indefinite Articles 


Earlier we learned about determiners. Articles are a kind of determiner because they 
appear before a noun to make it clear and show exactly what we are talking about.There are only three articles the a and an.The is called the definite article because it refers to a specific noun or nouns 
e.g.
Please pass me the pen.
I want a specific pen.

We know which pen A is called the indefinite article because it is not specific e.g.
Please pass me a pen.
I would like any pen it doesnt matter which pen 
If the indefinite article is before a word that begins with a vowel sound then we use an instead of a e.g.I want an apple.

 
 
 
 
  
Theme 4
Following Rules 
We write for different reasons and purposes.Sometimes it is acceptable to write a text message with abbreviations and popular slang but sometimes it is not appropriate.Spelling grammar and punctuation have rules that should be followed to communicate a message effectively.



Rootsstems prefixes and suffixes 
A root or stem word is the original form of a word in its simplest form before prefixes and suffixes are added.

A prefix or a suffix or both can be added onto it.

A prefix is a small group of letters added to the beginning of the word.

 
A suffix is a small group of letters added to the end of a word.
Adding a suffix to a word can turn it into a different part of speech.
E.g.Happy is an adjective.
If we add ness it becomes a noun  Happiness.



Concord subjectverb agreement 
Subjects and verbs work together in a sentence.The form of the verb changes according to the subject of the sentence e.g.I think he thinks they think.I am you are she is.


 

Phrases and Clauses 
When giving instructions we often use adverbial phrases.Adverbial phrases change the 
verb and answer the questions where? when? how?  

E.g.Put the book on the table where Be home by lunchtime when Turn the key without 
making a noise how 
 
When giving instructions we often use the command form of the verb.
This also shows the main clause in a sentence 
e.g.Line up together when you arrive at school. 


Remember 
A phrase is a group of words without a finite verb.
A clause is a group of words with a finite verb.