Prepositions
A preposition shows where one thing is, in relation to
another. Prepositions are used in instructions.

Sentences
There are four types of sentences:
Statements - give information (full stop)
Questions - ask for information (question mark)
Commands - tell someone to do something (exclamation mark)
Exclamations - express a strong feeling or emotion (exclamation mark).

Simple sentences
A simple sentence has only one verb and subject.


Adverbs
An adverb can describe an action (verb). An adverb can describe HOW an action happens. An adverb can describe WHEN an action happens. An adverb can describe WHERE an action happens.
Adverbs tell us more about verbs and adjectives. There are different types of adverbs:
Adverbs of MANNER (ask how?)
Adverbs of TIME (ask when?)
Adverbs of PLACE (ask where?)
Adverbs of DEGREE (ask how much/often?).



Linking sentences
Conjunctions are words used to link sentences together, but it is not always a good
idea to have long sentences when you are giving instructions. There are other ways to
create a link between sentences, without joining them.

Connecting words help link or join ideas in a paragraph so that a piece of writing flows. Connecting words are often used at the beginning of a sentence. A comma must be inserted when the connecting word is used at the beginning of a sentence.

Another way of linking sentences is to use pronouns so that you don’t have to say the same Proper or Common noun over and over again.

Finite verbs and Clauses
Finite verbs have a subject and can stand alone.

A clause is a group of words that contain a
finite verb and a subject. If it makes sense on
its own, it is called an independent or main
clause.


To find a finite verb, find the verb and then ask “who” or “what”. This will give you the subject.


Complex sentences
A complex sentence has one main clause and one or
more subordinate clauses. A subordinate clause adds
extra information to the main clause and cannot stand by
itself. Subordinate clauses are joined to the main clause
by linking words.
The main
clause doesn’t
always appear at
the beginning of a
sentence.


Abbreviations
An abbreviation is a shortened form of a word or a phrase.
Types of abbreviations:
The initials of the words are used (Republic of South Africa – RSA) – This is called Initialism.

Truncation is when the word is shortened ( January – Jan. ) a full stop is used if the
last letter of the abbreviation is not the same as the last letter of the origional word.


Acronym
An acronym is a special abbreviation when the initials make a “word”: HIV/AIDS – HIV is an abbreviation (letters are said individually)
AIDS is an acronym (it makes another "word")



Future Continuous Tense
Tenses show when an action takes place: past, present or future. The future tense
shows that the action is about to happen. The continuous form of the future tense
shows that the action will be ongoing.
Eg I shall/will be taking you to school next week.
Add the word: be The verb changes and the participle gets "-ing" on the end.


Present Continuous Tense
The present tense shows that the action takes place now or today. The continuous
form of the tense shows that the action is ongoing.
Eg I am singing a song.
You can also use: is or are
The verb changes and usually gets "-ing".



Past Continuous Tense
The past tense shows that the action has already happened. The continuous form of
the past tense shows that the action was ongoing.
Eg I was taking you to school last week.
You can also use: were
The verb changes and the participle gets "-ing" on the end.

Active and Passive Voice
Verbs can be used in two ways:
If the subject is doing the action, the verb is said to be active.
If the subject has the action done to it, the verb is said to be passive.
We usually use the active voice in narrative writing because It is shorter, easier and
more direct.
The tense of the verb must be changed when you convert to passive voice.



Collective nouns
Collective nouns name groups of people, animals or things
.

Abstract Nouns
Abstract nouns name things that we feel or
understand, but cannot touch, like ideas, feelings
and emotions


Similes and Metaphors
You can describe people or things by comparing them to other things.
Similes use "like or as".


Theme 4
Singular and Plural
Singular is a word showing that there is only one.
Plural is a word used to show more than one.
Usually, to show a plural of a noun, you add an 's'


Telling tales
A question is a type of sentence that is used to find
out things. We ask questions to find out what things
mean, how people feel, what we need to do, etc.
Questions start with a capital letter, and end with a
question mark.

The setting of a story
is the place where
the story takes place.


A good story starts by
immediately catching the
reader’s attention, so that
the reader wants to read on
to find out what happens.
A good story has as
interesting and satisfying
ending.


Indirect (reported) speech is a different way of showing what someone said and
doesn’t give the exact words. Add the word "that" and change the tense and pronoun.




Direct objects
Remember, some sentences have an object. The object is
part of the predicate.
A direct object is the person or thing that receives the
action by the subject and the verb.





Prepositions
A preposition is a part of speech that tells you where one thing is in relation to another thing. Prepositions come just before the noun they are referring to.



Nouns and Pronouns

Nouns are naming words that name things feelings people creatures plants and places.
Pronouns can take the place of nouns. You will need to know all about nouns and
pronouns before you learn about subjects and objects so refresh your memory.

Common nouns are names of ordinary things like duck, window, road, pie, field, hat.

Proper nouns are names given to people, places, things, months, events books like Table Mountain, Cape Town, Jennifer, Saturday (They always begin with a capital letter.)

Abstract nouns name things that we feel but cannot touch like feelings, ideas, emotions like love, fear, gratitude, education, justice, peace.

Collective nouns are names for groups of things people or animals like a pride of lions, a bunch of flowers, a crowd of people, a flock of birds a class of learners.

Pronouns take the place of nouns like it, he, she, they, them, I, you, me, we.





Subject and Predicate

The subject in a sentence tells you who or what is performing the action.

STEP 1 Find the verb. The verb is hugs.
STEP 2 Ask Who or what performs the verb? Who hugs? The fluffy duckling = subject

Subject
The subject always consists of a noun or pronoun but can sometimes contain an article and/or an adjective too.

Predicate
The rest of the sentence is called the predicate.The predicate contains a verb and other parts of speech. If there is another noun in the predicate that noun is called the object.



Direct and Indirect Object

The predicate of a sentence contains the verb the direct object and the indirect object.


Direct Object
A direct object is the person or thing that is acted upon by the subject and the verb. To find the direct object ask Whom? Or What?

For example: Kamogelo  answered  the question
Subject: Kamogelo
verb: answered
Object: question.


Indirect Object
An indirect object receives the direct object and answers the question to whom/what or for whom/what. The indirect object often has a preposition before it
like (to, for) which makes it easier to spot.


For example: Kaelo gave her sweet to her friend
Subject: Kaelo
verb: gave
Direct Object: her sweet
Preposition: to
Indirect Object: her friend.



Determiners

Determiners are words placed in front of a noun to make it clear what the noun refers to.

Determiners include:
Articles: a, an, the
Numbers: one, seven, three-hundred.

As well as other words like: this, that, these, those all, few, some, many, any, his, her, their, your, my, another.


Not all sentences have an object.

Some sentences only have a direct objects.



Conditional Sentences and Clauses (If clauses)

Conditional sentences can be used to state something that:
is likely to happen
is unlikely to happen
can never happen because the condition is not possible.

A conditional clause usually begins with the word If. In a sentence that begins with If, the conditional clause sets up a condition and the main clause tells us what will or would happen if that condition is met. The main clause in a conditional sentence often contains will, would or would have.





Adverbs

An adverb is a word that describes a verb e.g. she ran quickly past the volcanic lava.
They can also describe adjectives e.g. that was an extremely dangerous earthquake.


There are 5 types of adverbs
Manner
Time
Place
Degree
Frequency.




FRIENDLY LETTER FORMATMAT OF A FRIENDLY LETTER
10 Master Street
Airfield 		(ADDRESS AND DATE)
Benoni  		(NO FULL STOPS)
1501
1. August 2017

Dear Dad/Mum/Grandma/Uncle (GREETING TO THE PERSON)

 Introduction (START IMMEDIATELY WITH THE TOPIC)

 Body (ADD MORE INTERESTING/APPROPRIATE INFORMATION)

 Conclusion (END THE LETTER)

 Your sondaughter (END WITH WHO YOU ARE TO THE PERSON)

 Sam (ADD YOUR NAME)  NO FULLS STOPS IN THE ENDING.





Theme 2

Reports:
Reports are factual accounts or summaries written in a formal concise manner.

 Reports may be either investigative or eyewitnessed.
 The aim is to convey and record information.
 Avoid using the first person I or me.
 Include the time date and facts of the incident.



Noun Phrases
A noun phrase can be either one word or a group of words.

 A noun or a pronoun alone e.g. People can be greedy. I am doing some research. It was destroyed by a tsunami.


 A determiner and a noun e.g. Our friends lived in Japan. Those buildings were elaborate. That book is mine.

 Sometimes including an adjective e.g. Our closest friends lived in Japan.

 Sometimes beginning with a qualifier e.g. All those buildings were destroyed. Both of the disasters led to Sendai being destroyed. Scientist are intrigued by some remaining traces of aftershocks.


Noun phrases can be the subject or the object of a sentence just like nouns and
pronouns.


Descriptive Phrases

Writing a report is not the same as writing an imaginative story. A report is based on facts but that does not mean there are no descriptions. Tilly needed to describe what she saw in the sea that made the conditions stand out from the norm.


Adjectival phrases
Adjectival phrases do the work of the adjectives. They are groups of words without a verb that describe a noun


Phrases like this add interest or specific detail to descriptions.


Adverbial phrases
Adverbial phrases do the work of adverbs. They are groups of words that modify or
describe a verb. Like adverbs they answer the questions how where when or how
much?.


Prepositional phrases

Prepositional phrases begin with a preposition under the sea in the sand. Many adverbial and adjectival phrases begin with a preposition and therefore can also be called prepositional phrases.




Mood
A good writer should be able to capture a certain mood in a text or piece of writing. The mood of a text refers to the feeling that comes across when you read it. A report on a natural disaster will have a sad serious sombre mood. The mood created in a horror story will be frightening ominous and tense.The mood in a love story will be blissful.Sometimes we need to read between the lines to figure out the mood of a text just like when somebody tells you that he or she is fine but you can see that he or she is upset.Perhaps someone is feeling nervous but is trying to hide it. The words may seem happy but we must look for clues in the description that reveal the tension.



Synonyms and Antonyms

Synonyms are words with similar meanings.There is more than just one word that can
be used to represent a concept.Make your writing more exciting by looking in a
Thesaurus for synonyms which may be more exciting to use in your sentences.
Antonyms are words with opposite meanings.
Dangerous  safe lost  found internal  external colourful  dull Sometimes antonyms can be created by adding a prefix like un dis or in to the root word.Pleased  displeased friendly  unfriendly sincere  insincere honest  dishonest


Homonyms and Homophones
Homophones are words that sound alike but have different spellings and different
meanings.



Homonyms are polysemic.This means that they are words that have the same spelling and same pronunciation but have different meanings.You will always have to consider
the context of the word to figure out which meaning is intended.


Theme 3


A Not So Simple Story
Sometimes we make judgements about people based on preconceived ideas we have about them because of their appearance where they are from what group of people they belong to or because they are seen to be different in some way.Sometimes we dont even realise that we are doing it.This is called prejudice.




Clauses

A clause is a group of related words containing a subject and a verb. You have already learned about main or independent clauses which make sense as sentences on their own and subordinate or dependent clauses which depend on the main clause in order to make sense.

Main and subordinate clauses come in many varieties.

A verb clause makes sense on its own and is called an independent clause.
Verb clauses can be statements questions or commands.
For example:
The water is sparkling. statement
Did you wash your hands? question
Turn off the tap command .


Noun Clause
A noun clause is a group of related words that act together as a noun.
A noun clause does not make sense on its own so it is known as a dependent clause.
A noun clause can be the subject or the object of a sentence.



Revise Figurative Language
When we speak figuratively we use expressions that may seem to say one thing but actually mean something else.We do this because it is a great way to paint pictures in our imaginations.For example to say he is a fish out of water means that he is in
an uncomfortable situation that he is not used to but we can just imagine the desperation and panic that person is experiencing when we compare him to a fish
desperately flapping about on land struggling to breathe.



Simile and Metaphor
Similes and metaphors are both figures of speech that make comparisons in order to create images in our imaginations.

Simile and Metaphor
A simile is a figurative comparison that compares two things using like or as.
A metaphor is a figure of speech that makes a direct comparison between two things by
saying that something is something else

Some similes and metaphors have become so commonly used in English that almost
every English speaker recognises them and knows what they mean.
These are called idioms.

Some of the commonly used figurative sayings teach us a wise message.
These are called proverbs.



Definite and Indefinite Articles


Earlier we learned about determiners. Articles are a kind of determiner because they
appear before a noun to make it clear and show exactly what we are talking about.There are only three articles the a and an.The is called the definite article because it refers to a specific noun or nouns


We know which pen A is called the indefinite article because it is not specific.
If the indefinite article is before a word that begins with a vowel sound then we use an instead of a.






Theme 4
Following Rules
We write for different reasons and purposes.Sometimes it is acceptable to write a text message with abbreviations and popular slang but sometimes it is not appropriate.Spelling grammar and punctuation have rules that should be followed to communicate a message effectively.



Rootsstems prefixes and suffixes
A root or stem word is the original form of a word in its simplest form before prefixes and suffixes are added.

A prefix or a suffix or both can be added onto it.

A prefix is a small group of letters added to the beginning of the word.


A suffix is a small group of letters added to the end of a word.
Adding a suffix to a word can turn it into a different part of speech.



Concord subjectverb agreement
Subjects and verbs work together in a sentence.The form of the verb changes according to the subject of the sentence e.g.I think he thinks they think.I am you are she is.




Phrases and Clauses
When giving instructions we often use adverbial phrases.Adverbial phrases change the
verb and answer the questions where? when? how?.

When giving instructions we often use the command form of the verb.
This also shows the main clause in a sentence.



Remember
A phrase is a group of words without a finite verb.
A clause is a group of words with a finite verb.
